---
layout: post
title: "Linda Ware Promoting the Will Rogers “66” Highway Convention"
date: 2020-12-10
categories: ["architecture and urban planning"]
author: "Ethan Kim, Paul Valeriano, Tiffany Kwok, Zhuoran Li"
lat: 34.053587
lng: -118.509865
collectiontitle: "Adelbert Bartlett Papers, 1922-1950"
quarter: Fall 2020
desc: "Will Rogers State Park is notorious for its hiking trails with beautiful views of the ocean and the city of downtown LA. Will Rogers State Historic Park is the ranch estate of Will Rogers, the most popular and highest paid actor in Hollywood of the early 1930s. The ranch became the place where Will Rogers could relax with his family and friends, pursuing his favorite pastimes of riding and roping.  Will Roger’s Western Ranch House is on the National Register of Historic Places and contains priceless paintings and lots of western memorabilia."
---
The photograph is a black and white picture of starlet Linda Ware posing and waving out from the convention motorcar in front of a huge board. The board reads, "See America's Wonderland via Highway, National "66" Convention & Will Rogers Memorial Celebration; The Will Rogers Memorial Route" The board to the side of the motorcar reads, "Official Advance Car, Will Rogers "66" Highway, -Convention and Celebration." 15-year-old Linda Ware participated in the Will Rogers Highway Convention on July 25, 1940 to commemorate Will Rogers and the highway that was later named after him. The starlet, Linda Ware, was an aspiring movie star with hopes of making it big in Hollywood who was crowned “Miss Highway ‘66’” at the event.

#### Route 66
Route 66 defined American motorist culture throughout the Twentieth Century. The route originated in Santa Monica, California and extended all the way to Chicago, Illinois. Spanning over two-thousand and four-hundred miles, Route 66 traversed California, Arizona, New Mexico, Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas, Missouri, and Illinois. The highway was presented by the American Association of State Highway Officials and accepted by the U.S. Secretary of Agriculture in November of 1925. Tourism and frequent travel was abundant along the route which made it a meeting place for stars, politicians, and business people to publicize. 

#### Linda Ware
Born in 1925, Linda Ware was an American actor and singer who worked in concerts and films. She was also known for acting as Jane Gray in The Star Maker and as Donna Andrews in Paper Bullets. Miss Ware was sent to an orphanage after her mother’s death and was later adopted by her aunt, who provided for her musical education and encouraged her to find opportunities within the film industry. She received her first film contract from Paramount in 1939—one year after her family moved to Hollywood—to act as Jane Gray in the movie The Star Maker, during which she became the protege of Bing Crosby, a famous singer and actor. She became a well-known concert actor when Billboard praised her as “a promising, talented performer” who did “an excellent job handling pops, low blue numbers and musical comedy lyrics” for her outstanding performance in a musical in New York.

#### The Legacy of Will Rogers
William Penn Adair Rogers was one of America’s best-known celebrities in the 1920s and 1930s. He became popular for his political humor and moved to California in 1919 to start his film career. By 1935, Rogers became the highest paid actor in Hollywood, and he earned the title of “cowboy philosopher” because of his outspoken candor and practical advice. He had a great sense of humor and was well known for his weekly radio fireside chats which kept America informed and entertained during the Great Depression of 1929-1939. When he died in a plane crash, many memorials and places were created or named after him. In 1951, Route 66 was unofficially named "The Will Rogers Highway" by the U.S. Highway 66 Association, to commemorate his life and the impact he had on society. A state park was also established for the late Will Rogers which consisted of his house, ranch, and polo field. It was on the verge of closure but Jimmy Rogers, his son, prevailed and met with the State Park Committee to make sure that his father’s home would be left untouched. Numerous volunteers supported Jimmy and were all for the preservation of the historical estate in remembrance of his father, Will Rogers. Today the park attracts tourists across the nation all year round. 

Will Rogers’ legacy has been tried and true, enduring the test of time. A hundred years ago, Route 66 was honored to his name and alongside it a state park visited by the numbers. We may not know who Will Rogers is, but the world has cemented his legacy forever with memorials that will last numerous lifetimes.

![This is a black and white picture of starlet Linda Ware posing and waving out from the convention motorcar in front of a huge board. The board reads, "See America's Wonderland via Highway, National "66" Convention & Will Rogers Memorial Celebration, Santa Monica, California, July 25.26.27; The Will Rogers Memorial Route.." The board to the side of the motorcar reads, "Official Advance Car, Will Rogers "66" Highway, -Convention and Celebration-, Santa Monica, Cal., July 25-26-27.", Adelbert Bartleet Papers, 1922- 1950, uclamss_1300_5939, University of California, Los Angeles. Library Special Collections.](images/uclamss_1300_5939.png)
  {:.image}

Linda Ware promoting the Will Rogers “66” Highway Convention, Santa Monica, 1940. Adelbert Barlett, March 7th, 1940. Image courtesy of UCLA Library Special Collections.
  {:.caption}
  
#### Works cited

{:.bibliography}
1. FHWA. “Why President Dwight D. Eisenhower Understood We Needed the Interstate System.” Federal Highway Administration (FHWA). (2017). Web. 
https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/interstate/brainiacs/eisenhowerinterstate.cfm
2. "Highway Parley to Open Today: Will Rogers Memorial Road Delegates Come from Seven States." Los Angeles Times (1923-1995), Jul 25, 1940, pp. 1. ProQuest, https://search.proquest.com/docview/165130592?accountid=14512.
3. Linda Ware Comeback." The Hollywood Reporter (Archive: 1930-2015), vol. 118, no. 2, 1952, pp. 8. ProQuest, https://search.proquest.com/docview/2338146249?accountid=14512.
4. Linda Ware for 'Addams'." The Hollywood Reporter (Archive: 1930-2015), vol. 57, no. 8, 1940, pp. 3. ProQuest, https://search.proquest.com/docview/2297356117?accountid=14512.
5. Linneman, William R. “Will Rogers And The Great Depression.” Studies in American Humor, vol. 3, no. 2/3, 1984, pp. 173–186. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/42573185. Accessed 30 Nov. 2020.
6. Longfellow, Rickie. “Back in Time, Route 66 The Mother Road.” U.S. Department of Transportation: Federal Highway Administration. (2017). Web. https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/infrastructure/back0303.cfm
7. McHenry, Robert. “Route 66.” Britannica. (1992-1997). Web. https://www.britannica.com/topic/Route-66
8. Para Signs Linda Ware." The Hollywood Reporter (Archive: 1930-2015), vol. 50, no. 25, 1939, pp. 1. ProQuest, https://search.proquest.com/docview/2297914920?accountid=14512.
9. Tribute Given Will Rogers: Memorial Highway Group Convention Also Marks Pageant. (1940, Jul 26). 
10. Los Angeles Times (1923-1995) https://search.proquest.com/docview/165154068?accountid=14512
11. Will Rogers Memorial Pageant Plans Pushed at Santa Monica. (1940, May 29). Los Angeles Times (1923-1995) https://search.proquest.com/docview/165061833?accountid=14512
