---
layout: post
title: "Traditional Mexican Taco Trucks in Los Angeles"
date: 2020-12-10
categories: ["arts and culture"]
author: "Cruz Garcia, Michelle Nguyen, Kaitlyn Hahn, Tanner S."
lat: 33.985328674316406
lng: -118.20262908935547
collectiontitle: "Los Angeles Times Photographic Archive"
quarter: Fall 2020
desc: "This food truck is based in Southeast LA, more specifically Maywood Avenue in Huntington Park. The majority of people living in Huntington Park are Hispanic, which explains the pheltora of taco trucks in this part of Los Angeles. Food trucks are a common staple in Los Angeles, with taco trucks in particular having high blue collar clientele due to their quick service and extremely low prices. Many people of different backgrounds go out of their way to find these tacos trucks to experience new cultures."
---
The photograph titled "Customers at taco catering truck in Los Angeles, Calif., 1987" was captured by photographer Robert Gabriel for the Los Angeles Photographic Archive. Photographed in Los Angeles, Gabriel documents a communal moment between five men of Latino descent huddled around the open window of a traditional Mexican taco truck parked alongside a major road. 

The taco truck pictured in the photograph is located in Huntington Park, a city five miles from downtown Los Angeles and located in southeastern Los Angeles County. According to the 1990 U.S. census, Huntington Park has a population of 56,000 residents, of which 95% are Latino and 40,000 are Mexican (Romero 1). Surrounded by other well-populated cities like South Gate and Walnut Park, Huntington Park has "one of the highest residential densities in Southern California" (Klein 1). Although the official population of the city is 56,000, it does not include the undocumented residents. City officials estimate that the population is, in actuality, 75,000 people (Klein 1). With a large Latino population comes a more extensive Latino cultural influence. Since there is a large population of Latinos in Los Angeles County, Latin culture's influence on the county is inevitable. Many Latino Americans settle in East Los Angeles, making this part of the city a source or hub for Latin culture. 

One example of such Latino culture influence in Los Angeles is the traditional Mexican taco truck, also known as loncheras. Taco trucks are owned by Mexican immigrants, serve traditional Mexican street food, and target mostly Mexican immigrants as their customers. There are two types of mobile food vending equipment they frequently use: pushcarts and trailers (Lemon 9). Taco trucks are trailers, which contain a small kitchen inside where people can work, and pushcarts are two-wheeled equipment shorter than six feet wide; the pushcarts typically sell fruits, popsicles, or tamales on the sidewalks (Lemon 9). Tacos are created to be eaten with ease, so one does not need any utensils, and they can be consumed while standing (Lemon 6). Thus, the taco is an ideal meal for low-wage Mexican laborers who have busy work schedules (Lemon 5). The taco trucks' mobility helps to reach customers by going to where they live, eat, and work. During the daytime, trucks situate themselves near factories and construction sites, and in the evening, the trucks park near Latino-heavy neighborhoods like those of southeast Los Angeles County (Lemon 7). They usually park near busy roads or on commercial strips, as pictured in the photograph.

In the 1970s, the taco truck proliferated in Southern California's urban and rural landscape because of an influx of Mexican immigration into Los Angeles; the Mexican immigrants primarily immigrated in search of work (Lemon 7). The taco truck expanded again for the same reason in the late 1990s (Lemon 7). In 1990 and 2008, there were approximately 5,000 and 16,000 registered catering trucks in Los Angeles County, respectively (Murphy 1; Therolf 1). While these may be impressive numbers by themselves, they do not include all of the unregistered catering trucks. 

Over the years, taco truck owners have gone through great adversity because of several restrictive laws created by the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors and City Council of Los Angeles. In the 1970s, the City Council of Los Angeles set a ten-minute limit on curbside sales for each catering truck, but this ordinance was later dropped in 1975 (Murphy 2). Another ordinance was passed in 2008, when the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors set the parking time limit to an hour, increased the over parking fine from $60 to $1,000, and "made violations punishable by up to six months in jail," but this law was also discarded only five months later (Jennings 4). Both ordinances were struck down in court because they were too vague in their descriptions and therefore ruled unconstitutional (Therolf 1). In terms of vagueness, neither laws specified when the catering trucks could return and how far the trucks needed to move to and from their prior locations, respectively (Murphy 3; Therolf 1). Even with these ordinances lifted, numerous regulations — regarding catering trucks —  remain
in the law, including proof of access to a bathroom within 200 feet (California Health and Safety Code Section 114315) and evidence of a facility for the vehicle's storage and sanitizing (Therolf 2). 

Despite the challenges catering trucks faced, the traditional Mexican taco truck continued to expand, transforming into its gentrified version: the gourmet food truck. In 2008, Roy Choi became a prominent leader of the gourmet food truck movement when he founded Kogi, a line of Korean-Mexican food trucks based in Los Angeles (Stein 1). Loncheras inspired Kogi, but these two types of catering trucks differ in many ways. For example, loncheras are conveniently parked for their customers, while Kogi’s trucks are more difficult to find because their upcoming locations can only be found on Twitter or their official website (Wang 87). Kogi also mainly attracts middle-class Whites or Asians, so there is less pressure to sell their food at low costs than loncheras who must provide affordable food for their clientele: Mexican low-income laborers (Wang 88). Even though gourmet food trucks and loncheras are very different, the revival of the Los Angeles County food truck business is accredited to the success of gourmet food trucks like Kogi (Bernstein 1).

![A taco truck that reads “TACOS de ASADA” is parked along a sidewalk next to a main road. With five men pictured huddled around the open window, which is positioned under a shaded area. Many of them men seem to be of Latino descent. Many of them men are clad in tight jeans, clean white shirts, and white tennis shoes.](images/LA_Taco_Truck_Circa_1987.png)
  {:.image}

Customers at taco catering truck in Los Angeles, Calif., 1987. Robert Gabriel, 1987. Image courtesy of UCLA Library Special Collections.
  {:.caption}
  
  
  #### Works cited

{:.bibliography}
1. Bernstein, Sharon (2011). MADE IN CALIFORNIA; the Folks Who Build the Fancy Food Trucks; Southern California is Home to the Outfits that Customize Catering Trucks. They Enjoy a Boom as the Craze Spreads Throughout the Country. Los Angeles Times. 
2. Jennings, Lisa (2008). Los Angeles' Curbside Caterers, Brick-and-Mortar Restaurants Squabble Over New Parking Law. Nation's Restaurant News. 
3. Klein, Karen E (1996). Where Life Moves to Latin Beat; Huntington Park: City is a Friendly Mix of Latino Immigrants and Dedicated "Old-Timers" Who Wouldn't Think of Living Anyplace Else: [Home Edition]. Los Angeles Times (pre-1997).
4. Lemon, Robert (2019). “Introduction: Engaging Taco Truck Space.” The Taco Truck: How Mexican Street Food Is Transforming the American City. University of Illinois Press.
5. Murphy, Dean (1990). City Council may Curb Catering Trucks: [Home Edition]. Los Angeles Times (pre-1997).
6. Romero, Simon (1994). HUNTINGTON PARK 200,000 Get a Taste of Mexico at Fair: [Home Edition].  Los Angeles Times (pre-1997).
7. Stein, Joel (2010). Gourmet on the Go. Time International (Atlantic Edition) vol. 175. New York Times.
8. Therolf, Garrett (2008). Taco Trucks Can Stay Parked; Judge Overturns L.A. County's 1-Hour Limit on How Long They Can Remain in One Place. an Appeal is Expected. Los Angeles Times. 
9. Wang, Oliver (2013). “Learning from Los Kogi Angeles: A Taco Truck and Its City”. ​Eating Asian America: A Food Studies Reader,​ edited by Ku, Robert Ji-Song, et al. New York University Press.
