---
layout: post
title: "The Impact of World War II on Japanese-Americans in LA"
date: 2020-12-10
categories: ["history"]
author: "Brunn, Cordova, Layden, Pulice, Wei"
lat: 34.052189
lng: -118.243927
collectiontitle: "Los Angeles Daily News Negatives"
quarter: Fall 2020
desc: "Japanese were forced to surrender their weapons and radios to the LAPD in response to the Pearl Harbor bombing and perceived Japanese threat to US national security."
---
#### History of Japanese Settlement in LA
The Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 prohibited the entry of Chinese workers into the United States and opened the window to Japanese immigration. While numerous Japanese immigrated to San Francisco, following the 1906 earthquake many moved down to Los Angeles (LA Conservancy). Because many of these new immigrants worked as farmers and fishermen, they settled near the water or inland (NPS) Others moved to downtown Los Angeles to find work forming Little Tokyo (LA Conservancy). Coincidently, the LAPD headquarters, where this photo was taken, is in Little Tokyo. As the Japanese experienced success, so too they encountered jealousy and bigotry. Victims of discrimination and racial slurs, the Japanese were one of many Asian Los Angeles communities facing “yellow peril,” the racist belief in Asians as threats to western society (Lyman 708). At this time, the nation of Japan was also becoming a larger international threat, especially in the years leading up to WWII. Because of the rise of Japan and the already-present racial tension, Japanese-Americans, both citizens and new immigrants, were demonized and thought to be threats to national security (Kurashige 46). Therefore, the labeling of Japanese-Americans as a potential enemy became normalized and met little resistance from the greater Los Angeles population (Kurashige 46). This racist concept, that Americans were enemies just because of their race, was a response to the bombing of Pearl Harbor. As a consequence, the United States government seized Japanese-Americans’ property and  eventually unjustly interned 120,000 Japanese-Americans. 

#### The Bombing of Pearl Harbor
Japan was a threat far before the Pearl Harbor bombing on December 7th, 1941. After the Paris peace negotiations following World War I, Japan believed they received the short end of the stick. Western nations obtained many colonies throughout Asia while Japan received nothing. In turn, officials sought to expand Japan’s sphere of influence within the eastern hemisphere (Gompert, Binnendijk, & Lin 94). Japan began with China and then ventured out elsewhere. The U.S. remained neutral through it all, but Japan’s interest in Asia, specifically Indochina, conflicted with U.S. interests. Economic sanctions were initially placed on Japan. This eventually led to an embargo from the United States. With hopes of striking fear in the U.S., Japan signed the Tripartite Pact alongside Germany and Italy. Furthermore, in an effort to stop Japan’s expansion into Indochina, president Franklin D. Roosevelt met with Japanese ambassador, Kichisaburō Nomura. Nothing came out of the meeting between the two. Roosevelt went to the next level by freezing all Japanese financial assets in the United States. The extensive sanctions created immense economic stress in Japan, ultimately resulting in military conflict. 

On December 7, 1941, Admiral Isoruko Yammato ordered the surprise attack on the US naval base in Hawaii, ultimately killing “2,403 U.S. personnel, including 68 civilians, and destroyed or damaged 19 U.S. Navy ships, including 8 battleships” (Census.gov). Pearl Harbor marked the beginning of U.S. intervention in World War II and started a national security fear on predominantly the west coast. Consequently, it led to the ultimate dehumanization of Japanese-Americans (Archives.gov). 

#### Impact of Pearl Harbor on Japanese-Americans in LA
In response to the bombing of Pearl Harbor, Franklin D. Roosevelt issued Executive Order 9066 on February 19, 1942, which formally authorized the removal of Japanese-Americans along the West Coast as needed. However, this definitely did not mark the start to these high-profile discriminatory practices. Immediately following the Pearl Harbor attacks in early December of 1941, fear and distrust towards Japanese-Americans escalated to an all-time high. American employers began to fire their Japanese workers in mass waves and the general American public started boycotting ethnic businesses (Los Angeles Dept of City Planning, 51). The Japanese community of Terminal Island was hardest hit, as the military descended on the island and transformed it into a temporary detention center for early “enemy aliens,” even before the passage of Executive Order 9066. The paranoia-filled federal government began issuing orders requiring all Japanese-Americans to turn in all forms of weaponry, short-wave radios, and cameras in late December of 1941 (Wallach, 31). The photograph depicts the LAPD’s compliance with this order. However, everything boiled over after the issuing of Executive Order 9066 a full two months after the Pearl Harbor incident, and the government formally began their raids on homes, businesses, and Shinto temples, as well as forced evacuation efforts of residents deemed “dangerous” to national security. Despite opposition efforts to Executive Order 9066, the removal of any Japanese presence on the West Coast continued with full force. To comply with orders, Japanese businesses were forced to close and be sold often within days or weeks of notice, and home properties and personal belongings were sold, often far below the actual market value (Wallach, 29). Those who were lucky were able to seek the help of non-Japanese friends or religious organizations such as the Mount Hollywood Congregational Church to safeguard their possessions and properties (Los Angeles Dept of City Planning, 52). 

#### Effects of Executive Order 9066
The effects of Executive Order 9066 did not end until 1976; however, by the late 1940s, virtually all Japanese who lived in Los Angeles had already been greatly affected by the property seizures and relocation orders that already took place. Japanese-Americans eventually challenged the government’s actions in a series of court cases, but the Supreme Court upheld their legality (GRUSG, 2020). The U.S. government never claimed to be at fault for the property losses of Japanese-Americans until it was shown that the government’s discriminatory actions later resulted in adverse effects for the economy. For example, “the forced evacuation of Japanese-Americans led many homeowners and businessmen to sell out quickly; total property loss is estimated at $1.3 billion and net income loss at $2.7 billion” (GRUSG, 2020). With the realization of inequality and injustice, the Japanese-American Evacuation Claims Act of 1948 came into existence, with amendments in 1951 and 1965, and provided token payments to some Japanese-Americans for property losses.

The passage of Executive Order 9066 is a horrific example of America erasing civil liberties because of racism. Wars can often lead to national xenophobia but how a country deals with these sentiments “speaks volumes about its sense of fairness, and its willingness to judge individuals as individuals” (Stone 1067). This executive order, issued with a lack of evidence, ignored the constitutional rights of an entire group of people in the name of national security. The FBI debunked rumors of the threat posed by Japanese-Americans to national security (Stone 1070). The manner in which Japanese-Americans were stripped of their rights and property was entirely illegal, since “no charges were brought against these individuals, [and] there were no hearings” (Stone 1068). There was little protest to all of this from the public or civil liberties groups (Stone 1075). The opposition that did exist “stemmed from the growing rejection of racism among left-liberals in the 1930s and 1940s, and from mainline Protestant denominations who worked with the Japanese-American community on the West Coast” (Shaffer 598). During wartime, people are reluctant to question the government and people can demand absurd and racist actions in the name of national security. As the implementation of executive order 9066 shows, this is a dangerous combination that can lead to the destruction of individualism and civil liberties. 

![There are five adults standing in a room inside of a police department and three of them are middle-aged police officers. The other two adults are Japanese and a lot younger than the police officers. The two Japanese adults are surrendering guns, a radio, and a typewriter, which the officers inspect. Each item being surrendered is also tagged.](images/japaneseproperty.png)
  {:.image}

Japanese submit personal property to the Los Angeles Police Department. Los Angeles Times, 1941. Image courtesy of UCLA Library Special Collections.
  {:.caption}

#### Works cited

{:.bibliography}
1. “A Brief History of Japanese American Relocation During World War II (U.S. National Park Service).” National Parks Service. U.S. Department of the Interior, 1 April 2016. 
2. “A Pearl Harbor Fact Sheet.” US Census, The National WWII Museum, https://www.census.gov/history/pdf/pearl-harbor-fact-sheet-1.pdf. 
3. “Context: Japanese Americans in Los Angeles, 1869-1970.” City of Los Angeles Department of  City Planning Office of Historical Resources, 2018. Print.
4. “Executive Order 9066: Resulting in the Relocation of Japanese (1942).” General Records of the United States Government, Record Group 11, National Archives. https://www.ourdocuments.gov/doc.php?flash=false&doc=74. 
5. Hoffecker, Lilian Takahashi. “A Village Disappeared” American Heritage Vol 52 Issue 8 (2001). 64. 
6. “Japan’s Attack on Pearl Harbor, 1941.” Blinders, Blunders, and Wars: What America and China  Can Learn, by David C. Compert et al., RAND Corporation, 2014, pp.93-106. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/10.7249/j.ctt1287m9t.15. Accessed 23 November 2020.
7. “Japanese-American Internment During World War II.” National Archives. The U.S. National  Archives and Records Administration, 17 March 2020. https://www.archives.gov/education/lessons/japanese-relocation. 
8. Kurashige, Scott. “Crenshaw and the Rise of Multiethnic Los Angeles.” Afro Hispanic Review Vol 27 (2008). 41-58. 
9. “Los Angeles Conservancy.” Japanese-American History at Terminal Island | Los Angeles Conservancy. Accessed 13 November 2020. 
10. Lyman, Stanford M. "The "Yellow Peril" Mystique: Origins and Vicissitudes of a Racist Discourse." International Journal of Politics, Culture, and Society 13, no. 4 (2000): 683-747. Accessed 13 November 2020.
11. Shaffer, Robert. “Opposition to Internment: Defending Japanese American Rights During World War II.” Historian, vol. 61, no. 3, Spring 1999, p. 597. EBSCOhost, doi:10.1111/j.1540-6563.1999.tb01039.x.
12. Stone, Geoffrey R. “National Security, National Origin, and the Constitution: 75 Years After  Eo9066.” Case Western Reserve Law Review, vol. 68, no. 4, Summer 2018, pp. 1067–1083. EBSCOhost, search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=a9h&AN=130519662&site=ehost-live. 
13. Vidyalankar, Indira. “PEARL HARBOR : WHY SURPRISE ?” The Indian Journal of Political Science, vol. 41, no. 4, 1980, pp. 847-869. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/41855061. Accessed 23 November 2020.
14. Wallach, Ruth. “Images of America: Los Angeles in World War II.” Arcadia Publishing, 2011. Print.
