---
layout: post
title: "Jimmy Carter’s Visit to El Sereno, California"
date: 2020-12-10
categories: ["neighborhoods"]
author: "Hana B., Alyssa D., Pablo G., Rahul P."
lat: 34.06658
lng: -118.18446
collectiontitle: "Los Angeles Times Photographic Archive"
quarter: Fall 2020
desc: "On the corner of Wilson Way and Rodman Drive is where the photo of the 39th President of the United States, Jimmy Carter, was taken during his morning run.  He is accompanied by city official Stephen Rodriguez. Carter visited Southern California in 1979 to gain support from the Mexcian-American population."
---
#### Jimmy Carter's Visit to Los Angeles - El Sereno May 5, 1979
The photo above depicts Carter and his friend, Stephen Rodriguez,  jogging to Wilson High School with Rodrigez’s son and the Secret Service.  

At the time of the President’s visit, Rodriguez was a Community Development Project Coordinator, city planner, and architect for the city. Rodriguez's political career was short-lived; he ran for East Los Angeles' 14th district's city council but lost the election.  Rodriguez then went onto host a public access television program called “Inside Community Development,” which celebrates the work of the Community Development Department. 

Carter stayed with the Rodriguez family in El Sereno during his visit to Los Angeles. After the jog, Carter was driven to the Biltmore Hotel, where he met with Mayor Tom Bradley, to discuss the economic development of Los Angeles county. Carter then met with members of the Chicano Caucus in the California State Legislature, before traveling to Placita de Dolores. At the plaza, he gave a speech that commemorated Mexico achieving its independence from Spain and dedicated the El Grito mural to Placita de Dolores. The mural depicts Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla, a Mexican priest, advising the Mexicans to revolt against the Spanish colonial government (“Museo Eduardo Carrillo”). The priest is said to have been crying and yelling while speaking, giving the mural the name of El Grito, the Spanish word for scream.   

Soon after, Carter attended the Festival de Cinco de Mayo at the Paseo de Los Pobladores, an event hosted by the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors. At the festival, Carter spoke about Mexican-American’s independence from Spanish rule, and the supervisors granted him the Key to the County. The Cinco de Mayo festival ended, and Carter concluded his trip to Southern California by visiting a friend at the University of California Hospital. After the hospital visit, Carter boarded Air Force One and flew back to the White House.  

#### History of El Sereno 
The neighborhood of El Sereno is one of the “oldest and most historic” communities in Northeast Los Angeles, California (KCET). Before Spanish rule in the late 1760s, the land of El Sereno was home to the Native Tongva Village of Otsungna. In 1771 the San Gabriel Mission Arcángel was constructed, and one of the first pueblos was established a few years later in 1784. Under Mexican rule in 1821, the land was renamed Rancho Rosa de Castilla and went through a ranching period. After the Mexican Cession, the Rancho Rosa de Castilla went under American rule in 1850. The construction of railways in the early 1900s brought development and helped the small community grow. Before becoming an official neighborhood, the area was unofficially known as Bairdstown and was later renamed El Sereno before annexation to the City of Los Angeles on June 10, 1915 (History of El Sereno).

After World War Two, housing restrictions that prohibited minorities from purchasing homes in El Sereno were lifted, causing many Mexican-American families to move to the city.  The influx of minority homeowners created a housing shortage that was later resolved through the construction of new houses and apartment complexes. These new constructions ultimately provided the community with sufficient housing options. Today, Hispanics make up a majority of El Sereno’s population. 

#### The Carter Administration and the Mexican-American population
One of the many focuses of the Carter administration was the well being of the Mexican-American population. 

Carter visited Los Angeles, California in 1979 in hope to gain the support of Mexican-American voters, who made up 16% of the California vote (Tolchin). He attempted to appeal to the Hispanic population by appointing a Mexican-American as the director of Immigration and Naturalization Services and proposing an amnesty program allowing certain undocumented immigrants to become temporary residents. Providing permanent resident status to undocumented immigrants entering the country after 1970 allowed for legal labor, which prevented exploitation in the workforce. Even with these efforts, many Mexican-Americans believed that Carter was more concerned about gaining voter support, rather than helping the community thrive. Despite these conflicting opinions, jogging through El Sereno and interacting with the residence helped the President create connections with the Mexican-American population. 

![President Carter takes an early morning run in El Sereno with his host Stephen Rodriguez (next to Carter), son Stephen Jr., two Secret Service agents, and two dogs. They are running along a busy road surrounded by cars. The road appears to be undergoing construction because safety equipment is present.](images/carterelsereno.png)
  {:.image}

U.S. President Jimmy Carter on morning run with Stephen Rodriguez in El Sereno, Calif., 1979. Jack Guant, May 6, 1979, part of LA Times Photographs Collections, copyright UCLA Charles E Young Research Library.
  {:.caption}
  
  
#### Works cited

{:.bibliography}
1. Casen, George. “El Sereno Historical Society.” El Sereno Historical Society, www.elserenohistoricalsociety.org/El_Sereno.php.  
2. Crossland, David. “President Carter's Amnesty Proposals for Undocumented Aliens.” In Defense of the Alien, vol. 1, 1978, pp. 97–101. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/23141186. Accessed 29 Nov. 2020.
3. Harris, Scott. “I may not have won the prize, but I’m proud of what we did.” Los Angeles 
Times, https://www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-1988-10-04-me-3400-story.html 
4. “Jimmy Carter Presidential Diary.” Jimmy Carter Library , 5 May. 1979, www.jimmycarterlibrary.gov.  
5. “Murals.” Museo Eduardo Carrillo, https://museoeduardocarrillo.org/. 
6. President Carter takes an early morning run with Stephen Rodriguez in El Sereno, Calif., 1979,  Los Angeles Times Photographic Archive (Collection 1429). UCLA Library Special Collections, Charles E Young Research Library.
7. Sonksen, Mike. “El Sereno's Happy Valley Begins to Get Skittish.” KCET, 8 Dec. 2017, www.kcet.org/shows/departures/el-serenos-happy-valley-begins-to-get-skittish. 
8. Sorrentino, Constance, and Susan Fleck. “Employment and Unemployment in Mexico's Labor Force.” Bls.gov, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Nov. 1994, www.bls.gov/mlr/1994/11/art1full.pdf. 
9. Tolchin, Martin Times, The New York. “Carter, on Coast, Promises to Protect Human Rights of Illegal Aliens.” The New York Times, 6 May 1979, www.nytimes.com/1979/05/06/archives/carter-on-coast-promises-to-protect-human-rights-of-illegal-aliens.html.
