---
layout: post
title: "Michael Zinzun: The Legendary Fight Against Police Brutality"
date: 2020-12-10
categories: ["politics and society"]
author: "Katherine Guerra, Julia Zhou, Bernardo Maurizi, Shawn Miller"
lat: 34.15782165527344
lng: -118.14832305908203
collectiontitle: "Los Angeles Times Photographs Collection"
quarter: Fall 2020
desc: "The Community Arms Apartments Complex was attacked by police officers within the Pasadena Police Department for fighting for racial injustices, and is the site where Zinzun lost his sight."
---
### Early Life
On February 14, 1949, Michael Zinzun was born into an ethnically diverse family in northern Chicago. Zinzun spent his early childhood in the Cabrini-Green Homes, which was a public housing project with predominantly African American residents. High crime and unemployment rates made this area a metonym of government failure at the local and national levels (Modica). At age eight, Zinzun’s father passed away and Zinzun was sent to Pasadena, California to live with his aunt. As a teenager, Zinzun was somewhat worrisome. Jim Storms, the dean at Blair High School, describes Zinzun as an intense “typical young man from a black ghetto background” (Stewart).  Zinzun admitted to running “the streets as a teenager and [getting] into a lot of trouble.” (Stewart) In 1965, Zinzun was arrested for incorrigibility and car theft. After Zinzun was out of custody in 1967, he devote himself to radical Black politics (Stewart). 

### Los Angeles Police Department’s Involvement in Police Brutality
Around the time Zinzun began to dedicate himself to politics, the Los Angeles Police Department had been at the center of multiple discussions regarding the conduct and administration of their department. From the 1960s to the 1990s, police corruption and brutality dominated the district. As a consequence, the federal judge thought it would be beneficial to implement the civil Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organization Act (RICO) (Rowan 253). 

Because most acts of corruption remained unchecked, the LAPD continued to rely on excessive force. In most cases, the officers decided how to intervene based on racial profiling. From 1974 to 1978, 28% of the 321 gunshots were aimed towards unarmed Black people, with 55% of those shootings considered “out of policy” (Campbell et al 253). In cases where the officer was in a situation of superiority compared to the suspect, police still abused their positions and power, and African Americans were the most targeted.

### Michael Zinzun Activism and Politics
Police brutality in the 1970s-1980s revealed the commonality of unwarranted punishment that minority groups faced simply because of their complexion. The long history of the LAPD’s discriminatory policing towards these groups has been an issue that many human rights activists have tried to reform. Feeling aggrieved towards the discriminatory agastreatment of the Black community, an activist group named the Black Panther Party was formed. Micheal Zinzun joined the group in 1970 and managed to follow them along the journey to a better society for African Americans. Because of his efforts against the excessive use of force by law enforcement, he was beaten, defamed, and arrested by police officers who acted in the grip of impulse fomented by their racism and abuse of power.

Michael Zinzun was a dynamic figure in the African American community, actively demanding reform for police brutality against all people of color. For example, he created the Coalition Against Police Abuse (CAPA), whose goal was to investigate abuse allegations, provide support for victims and families, and agitated for justice in street demonstrations and courtrooms (Felker). Zinzun made sure “no one [was] set aside,” and that “Black, Latino, and White communities” were the primary beneficiaries of his Coalition Against Police Abuse efforts (Stein). 

In addition to helping the Black community, Zinzun actively worked along side lesbian and gay groups who suffered from discrimination. He was a firm believer in cross-cultural and multiracial alliances and was a part of many political alliances, including the Feminist and Peace and Freedom Party. Michael Zinzun fought for integration, equality, and justice for people all over LA county and across the country. 

In the 1980s, Zinzun had established a reputation all over LA county. He was a community leader who strived for equality for people of all races. Among other efforts, he assisted victims of violent police misconduct that drew the attention of the police department. His power to enforce justice enraged the police. However, in the eyes of those unjustly oppressed by police enforcement, Michael Zinzun was a hero. He fought long battles for change in the justice system, who abused its authority and power. 

### The Incident and the Photo
The Pasadena Police Department recognized Michael Zinzun because of his fight for human rights and battles against police oppression. This made Zinzun a target. In 1982, Zinzun intervened in an attempted arrest of two men in Pasadena. He was arrested, though later charges were dropped. Later, in 1986, Zinzun witnessed the altercation of a violent arrest happening in the Community Arms Housing Projects. Trying to prevent the abuse of a man, Zinzun was severely beaten by the officers of the Pasadena Police Department. He was left permanently blind in his left eye. The officers accused Zinzun of striking against the officer and claimed that he fell and injured his eye while being chased by officers. However, Zinzun denied and exclaimed that he was wrongfully knocked to the ground, fired with tear gas, and assaulted with a flashlight (Hastings). He sued and won “ a $1.2 million settlement” (Stewart).  

Little did the victory do to alter the operations of the police department, and the legacy of the incident continued to have negative influences on Zinzun’s political life. In 1989, Zinzun sued the City of Los Angeles and an assistant police chief for defamation during an election for Pasadena City Council. He argued that the city and the police were distributing misinformation of Zinzun as the subject of a file in the Police Department's anti-terrorist division. $3.8 million was awarded to Zinzun by the jury but was soon overturned in 1991. On future appeal in 1994, the case was closed with Zinzun winning $512,500 (Rainey). In wishing to put police brutality to an end, Zinzun used the settlement to battle with the chains of discrimination and fight for social justice. 

### Conclusion
The Black community has been marginalized and terrorized by the justice system's abuse of power across the U.S. and LA. Michael Zinzun fought through long battles of racial inferiority in the constitutional rights, the justice system, and the streets. Zinzun was a community leader, political activist, human rights advocate, and humanitarian. His passion for anti-police brutality and devotion to helping minorities who struggled through institutionalized oppression, made an impact on all people of color. Michael Zinzun was willing to “lose an eye fighting against injustice[s] than live as a quiet slave” (Stewart). 

![Michael Zinzun, an ex- Black Panther is seen in the image posing next to a police brutality flyer. We are able to see that Michael Zinzun is the man who was photographed in the actual police brutality flyer. He lost an eye due to a police attack in Pasadena, CA, which is why he has an eye patch. We are able to see the anger and sadness in his eyes that has been provoked due to the long years of injustices him and all people of color have faced.](images/ZinzunBrutality1.png)
  {:.image}

Michael Zinzun next to police brutality flyer, 1986. Lacy Atkins, 1986. Image courtesy of Los Angeles Times Photographs Collection and Source.
  {:.caption}
  
#### Works cited

{:.bibliography}
1. Campbell, Alec, et al. The Los Angeles Police Department’s Use of Dogs. Aug. 1998.
2. Felker-Kantor, Max. “The Coalition against Police Abuse: CAPA's Resistance Struggle in 1970s Los    Angeles.” Journal of Civil and Human Rights, vol. 2, no. 1, 2016, pp. 52–88. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/10.5406/jcivihumarigh.2.1.52. Accessed 1 Dec. 2020
3. Hastings D. Activist Escalates His Anti-police Campaign. Los Angeles Times. 1986 https://www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-1986-08-21-ga-17481-story.html
4. Modica, Aaron. “Cabrini Green Housing Project, Chicago, Illinois (1942-2009).” Black Past, 5 			January 2010, www.blackpast.org/african-american-history/cabrini-green-housing-			project-chicago-1942-2009/. Accessed November 2020.
5. Parachini, Allan. “An Unreconstructed '60s Radical Still Takes His Case to the Streets.” Los 			Angeles Times, 27 July 1986, search.proquest.com/latimes/docview/292369639/abstract/			278378D6EA6F4E15PQ/1?accountid=14512. Accessed November 2020. 
6. Rainey, James. “ Political Activist Zinzun Awarded $512,500 to Settle Suit With City Police: Former 		Pasadena City Council candidate claimed he was defamed by LAPD official who released 		information about him.” Los Angeles Times, 28 July 1994, search.proquest.com/latimes/ 			docview/282374766/830DB25E7E484DF6PQ/1?accountid=14512. Accessed December 2020. 
7. Rowan, M. (2003). Leaving No Stone Unturned: Using RICO As a Remedy For Police Misconduct.
8. Stein N. The gang truce: A movement for social justice. Social Justice. 1997;24(4):258-266. https://www.proquest.com/docview/231948170?accountid=14512.
9. Stewart J.  Michael Zinzun, 57; Ex-Black Panther Challenged Southland Police Agencies. Los Angeles                                        Times. 12 July 2006. https://www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-2006-jul-12-me-zinzun12-story. html.
